Every January 1st, health and fitness become trendy again. Increasing online searches for the latest dietary fad trend, gyms overflowing with patrons, and every item on the grocery store shelf is suddenly paired with ads reminding you of its “whole grain status” or the number of nutrients it contains.The seeming inevitability that the eager gung-ho attitude towards a healthier life will fade is lampshaded by the sardonically named “Ditch Your Resolutions Day” on January 17.


But why do people so glibly cast aside the changes they knew just weeks ago they wanted to make? How do so many well-meaning commitments fade and crumble so quickly? Most existing plans, diets, and trackers are reactive rather than proactive. People go to the gym trying to lose weight they’ve already put on, track food they’ve already eaten on trackers, and feel a sense of guilt and shame trying to make up for bad habits of the past. Even when searching most popular dieting apps for foods, participants first search up the food item and view its nutritional stats, then decide whether to eat it - placing the onus of creativity on them to figure out what they want to eat, and then determine whether it’s “healthy enough,” often after a long day of class or work. What if the technology could help suggest your meals to you, instead of waiting for you to do the work?


The debate between the “calories in, calories out” mindset of healthy eating and a more complete nutritional overview has adherents on both sides, and being able to search for more than just calorie counts is an important feature of any program aiming to bring a more complete healthy eating plan to the general public. From this mindset, Nu3tion helps individuals insert their dietary restrictions and needs, as well as their target values of different nutrients for a current meal, and helps make suggestions to what foods they could eat. For those who need only to fill a specific number of calories budgeted to a particular meal, using some keywords and a calorie count will help bring up suggestions, but users can also enter target values for up to three nutrients and receive recommendations accordingly.


For example, imagine a user is looking for a food item with approximately 12g of protein, 5g of fat, and 300mg of calcium. After choosing these nutrient values, our system uses a modified Nearest Neighbor algorithm on a normalized set of data to identify the food items in our database that are most likely to match the user’s desires. Additionally, users can restrict these searches across broad dietary restriction categories, including vegan, nut allergy, lactose-intolerant, and more. In the current prototype, we’ve set up some basic conditions of memory about each user, especially dietary restrictions, as those are unlikely to change. Future development could enhance the tracking aspects over the course of days or weeks, allowing users to more clearly track their long-term progress, and even pre-suggest what nutrients the user may want to focus their upcoming meals for the day on.


With the help of Nu3tion, committing to a healthier lifestyle no longer feels onerous. Whether living life on the go, or simply wanting to plan out your next trip to the grocery store, users can take a proactive approach to their health like never before. The new-and-improved new year’s goal is for these resolutions to last more than a few months, or maybe, even the rest of the year.